6 JOIN STATEMENTS

1. How do you find data that is held in two separate data tables?
Answer: By employing a join query.

2. Explain, in your own words, the difference between a CROSS JOIN, INNER JOIN, LEFT
 OUTER JOIN, RIGHT OUTER JOIN, and FULL OUTER JOIN. Give a real world example for
 each.

INNER JOIN: requires the rows from table1 and table2 to have matching column values resulting in
a new table that combines the columns values of each table based on the join condition and returns
one row on the new table for commons rows between the queried tables.
Example: see what department employees are assigned to based on id.

OUTER JOIN: produces a joined table where every row is retained even if a row from table1 has
no matching row in table2.

LEFT OUTER JOIN: Retains all records from table1 of the linked tables. If no matching rows from
 table2 are found, in table1, a row is still returned for table2 with a value of NULL.
Example: select all customers and their orders from using a 'customers' table and  an 'orders' table
referencing 'customer_id' as the join.

RIGHT OUTER JOIN: Retains all records from table2 of the linked tables. If no matching rows
from table1 are found, in table2, a row is still returned for table1 with a value of NULL.
Example: return the department name for each employee based on department id from an
employees table and a department table.

FULL OUTER JOIN: returns all records from the queried tables placing a value of NULL in the
columns were no match is found in the opposing table.
Example: return products that have product codes and product codes not assigned to products.

CROSS JOIN: Returns a table with rows that are a product / combination of each row from table1
with each row from table2. Example: see what department employees are assigned to.
Example: return all possible interior and exterior color combinations from exterior_color table and
an interior_color table.   SELECT * FROM exterior_color CROSS JOIN interior_color;

3. Define primary key and foreign key. Give a real world example for each.
Primary Key: a table field which uniquely ids each record/row in a database table. Must contain
unique values.

FOREIGN KEY: a key used to link tables together by referencing a primary key.

Example: link a customers table to an orders table using customer_id as the Primary Key in the
parent table and customer_id as the Foreign KEY in the child table.

4. Define aliasing: process of giving a table or a column a temporary name in a query. The name is
usually a single letter.

5. Change this query so that you are using aliasing:
SELECT p.name, c.salary, c.vacation_days
FROM professor AS p
JOIN compensation AS c
ON p.id = c.professor_id;

6. Why would you use a NATURAL JOIN? Give a real world example.
Use as a shorthand to a USING list when you want to return column names present in both tables.

7. see employees.sql

Result:
employee   | shiftid
-------------+---------
Jason Kiddz |       1
Jane Right  |       1
Anna Houz   |       3
Cary Moss   |       1
Karen Mason |       2
Terry Crews |       2
Jenny Jones |       3


Result:
 schedule
----------------
8:15pm-4:45am
8:00pm-4:00am
4:15am-12:45pm
4:00am-12:30pm
12:15pm-8:45pm
12:00pm-8:30pm

8. see pets.sql


9. Write a query to find the name of the person who adopted Seashell
- see pets.sql


10. see books.sql
