1. In your own words, explain the benefits of normalization. Include a real-world scenario where
normalization is necessary.
Answer: mitigates data duplication by eliminating redundancy, reduces mistakes when updating data,
makes updating more efficient by allowing increased concurrency. It also reduces data irregularities
, enforces referential integrity on data, and groups data logically.
Products, Stores, Inventory Model:

PRODUCTS          |
productid         |
productname   |
price

STORES
storeid
store


INVENTORY
storeid
productid


2. List and explain the different normal forms and how they relate to one another, with regard to your
real-world scenario in the first question.

INF: Columns/ fields with multiple values are a violation, and every row should be unique. Imagine
a supplier table, included in the above mentioned scenario,  with supplierid, suppliername, and
products as attributes and products was populated with multiple values in one cell. To solve this
products needs a separate table which references the supplierid in the supplirers table. Now there is
a way of tracking what products belongs to what suppliers, and creating a new row for every new
product without violating 1NF.

2NF: Must be in 1NF, and have no partial key dependencies. Meaning any values outside of the
composite key of the table must be completely dependent upon all columns of the composite key.
No calculated feilds i.e. TOTAL are allowed when you have already stored quantity and price.

Take the PRODUCTS table from above for example. If a store attribute is
added to the PRODUCTS table it would be a violation. Price is dependent on productid and
productname but not store. The price will be the same regardless of store. To solve add the store
and productname attributes to the STORES table. Now in the PRODUCTS table price is product
dependent and productname is store dependent in the STORES table. Keep in mind that product
does not merely depend on store.

3NF: Must be in 2NF, and all columns depend solely on the primary key. Removes transitive
dependencies or things that do not belong together need to be separated because they are separate
things. See model.
The inventory table maps stores to products and provides a unique combination of storeid and
productid.

BCNF: all data in a table must depend only on that table’s primary key, and not on any other field
in the table. 

3. The student_records table below shows the students and their grades in different subjects. The table
 is already in first normal form (1NF). Convert this table to the third normal form (3NF) using the
 techniques you learned in this checkpoint.
Professor: professorid, professor_name
Student: studentid, student_email, student_name
Transcript: entry_id, studentid, professor_name, subject, grade

4. In your own words, explain the potential disadvantages of normalizing the data above. What are its
trade-offs? Discuss this with your mentor.
Disadvantages include decreasing database performance do to numerous JOINS, requires detailed analysis, and is complex
and costly to design.

5. Looking at the tables you have normalized. If you need to denormalize to improve query
performance or speed up reporting, how would you carry out denormalization for this database
design? Discuss potential strategies with your mentor.

-Add productname to all tables
-Group prices
-Remove unique rows

6. Discuss the trade-offs between data normalization and denormalization in this scenario with your
mentor.
